Feat(aigw): v2 a2a rate limit how-to (#6511)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_how-tos/ai-gateway/rate-limit-a2a-traffic.md

---
title: "Rate limit A2A traffic"
content_type: how_to

> description: "Apply per-consumer rate limits to A2A routes proxied through {{site.ai_gateway}}"

Reviewer: How is this applying per-consumer rate limits when no AI consumer is created?

permalink: /ai-gateway/rate-limit-a2a-traffic/

products:
  - ai-gateway

works_on:
  - konnect

min_version:
  ai-gateway: '2.0'

tags:
  - ai
  - a2a
  - traffic-control

tldr:
  q: "How do I rate limit A2A traffic in {{site.ai_gateway}}?"

>   a: "Create a Rate Limiting Advanced AI Policy and attach it to an AI Agent. Requests that exceed the limit are rejected with 429. You can combine this with an authentication policy so that rate limits apply per consumer."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a: "Create a Rate Limiting Advanced Policy and attach it to an AI Agent. Requests that exceed the limit are rejected with 429. You can combine this with an authentication policy so that rate limits apply per consumer."
```
Just because I was getting confused myself about the difference between the AI RL Advanced and just regular RL Advanced Policy.

tools:
  - kongctl

related_resources:
  - text: AI Agent
    url: /ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/
  - text: Rate Limiting Advanced policy
    url: /ai-gateway/policies/ai-rate-limiting-advanced/
  - text: "Proxy A2A agents through {{site.ai_gateway}}"
    url: /ai-gateway/get-started-with-ai-agent/
prereqs:
  inline:
  - title: OpenAI API key

>     include_content: md/ai-gateway/v2/prereqs/openai-kongctl

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  inline:
    - title: OpenAI API key
      content: |
        1. [Create an OpenAI account](https://auth.openai.com/create-account).
        1. [Get an API key](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys).
        1. Export your key:
           ```bash
           export OPENAI_API_KEY='YOUR_OPENAI_API_KEY'
           ```
      icon_url: /assets/icons/openai.svg
```
The one you had was exporting the header, which made the a2a agent prereq not work.

  - title: A2A agent
    include_content: md/ai-gateway/v2/prereqs/a2a-agent

cleanup:

>   inline:

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  inline:
    - title: Stop the A2A agent
      content: |
        ```sh
        docker compose down
        docker rm -f a2a-kongair-agent
        ```
````

    - title: Clean up Konnect environment
      include_content: cleanup/platform/konnect
      icon_url: /assets/icons/gateway.svg

faqs:
  - q: Can I rate limit A2A traffic without authentication?
    a: |
      Yes. Without an authentication policy, the Rate Limiting Advanced policy falls back to rate limiting by IP address. Add an authentication policy if you need per-consumer
      limits.
  - q: Does rate limiting affect A2A streaming responses?
    a: |
      Rate limiting applies at request time, before the upstream responds. A streaming SSE response that is already in progress is not interrupted. The rate limit check happens when the client sends the next request.
  - q: Can I use AI Rate Limiting Advanced instead?
    a: |

>       AI Rate Limiting Advanced limits based on LLM token consumption (prompt and completion tokens). The AI A2A Proxy policy does not extract token counts from A2A responses, so AI Rate Limiting Advanced has no token data to act on. Use the standard Rate Limiting Advanced policy for A2A traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      AI Rate Limiting Advanced limits based on LLM token consumption (prompt and completion tokens). The AI A2A Proxy Policy doesn't extract token counts from A2A responses, so AI Rate Limiting Advanced doesn't have any token data to act on. Use the standard Rate Limiting Advanced Policy for A2A traffic.
```

automated_tests: false

---

## Create an AI Agent and attach a rate limiting AI Policy

Create an [AI Agent](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/) entity that proxies A2A traffic to your upstream agent and a [Rate Limiting Advanced Policy](/ai-gateway/policies/rate-limiting-advanced/) that counts requests per consumer and rejects requests that exceed the configured limit. 

> This configuration allows 5 requests per 30 seconds, intentionally low to make it easy to trigger during testing. The AI Policy is attached to the AI Agent by using  `!ref rate-limit-bookings-agent#name` to refer to it by name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration allows 5 requests per 30 seconds. 
These settings are intentionally low to make it easy to trigger during testing. 
The AI Policy is attached to the AI Agent by using  `!ref rate-limit-bookings-agent#name` to refer to it by name.
```

<!-- vale off -->
{% validation request-check %}
url: /a2a/.well-known/agent-card.json
display_headers: true
status_code: 200
method: GET
headers:
  - 'apikey: a2a-secret-key-1'
{% endvalidation %}
<!-- vale on -->

The response includes rate limit headers:

```
HTTP/2 200
...
ratelimit-limit: 5
ratelimit-remaining: 4
ratelimit-reset: 30
x-ratelimit-limit-30: 5
x-ratelimit-remaining-30: 4
```
{:.no-copy-code}

`ratelimit-remaining` decreases with each request. `ratelimit-reset` shows the seconds until the window resets.

## Validate rate limit enforcement

Send 6 requests to the agent card endpoint in a loop to exceed the limit. The AI Agent detects each request as an A2A `GetAgentCard` operation, so the rate limit applies the same way it does for `message/send` or any other A2A method.

{% on_prem %}
content: |
  ```sh
  for i in $(seq 1 6); do
    echo "--- Request $i ---"
    curl -s -o /dev/null -w "HTTP status: %{http_code}\n"\
      http://localhost:8000/a2a/.well-known/agent-card.json \
      -H "apikey: a2a-secret-key-1"
  done
  ```

> {% endon_prem %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This shouldn't be here since this is Konnect-only right?

{% konnect %}
content: |
  ```sh
  for i in $(seq 1 6); do
    echo "--- Request $i ---"
    curl -s -o /dev/null -w "HTTP status: %{http_code}\n"\
      $KONNECT_PROXY_URL/a2a/.well-known/agent-card.json \
      -H "apikey: a2a-secret-key-1"
  done
  ```
{% endkonnect %}

> The first 5 requests return `HTTP status: 200`. The 6th request returns `HTTP status: 429`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first four requests return `HTTP status: 200`. The 5th request returns `HTTP status: 429`:
```

Reviewer: It fails on the fifth because we ran the other one earlier. So the fifth message here was the 6th total one we sent in this how to.

```

> --- Request 1 ---
> HTTP status: 200
> --- Request 2 ---
> HTTP status: 200
> --- Request 3 ---
> HTTP status: 200
> --- Request 4 ---
> HTTP status: 200
> --- Request 5 ---
> HTTP status: 200
> --- Request 6 ---
> HTTP status: 429

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--- Request 1 ---
HTTP status: 200
--- Request 2 ---
HTTP status: 200
--- Request 3 ---
HTTP status: 200
--- Request 4 ---
HTTP status: 200
--- Request 5 ---
HTTP status: 429
--- Request 6 ---
HTTP status: 429
```
It fails on the fifth because we ran the other one earlier. So the fifth message here was the 6th total one we sent in this how to.
